# Final Project: Neural Networks for Predicting Flood Density in New York State
## Abstract / Summary
	The risks of flash flooding are increasing in New York state, as climate and land use changes cause more severe storm events and greater likelihoods of flooding during storms.  These floods can cause disastrous loss of life and property that impacts communities long after the storm is over, yet forecasting flooding is difficult due to the large number of variables with non-linear relationships involved.  This is the motivation for using artificial neural networks to create accurate predictions of flooding in New York using publicly available data.  Mapping tools from ArcGIS online and Pro were used to assemble flood risk geologic and hydraulic variables, and flood density was used as a predictor for modeling flood risks.  Because of the infrequency of severe flooding events, the data has an inflated amount of zeros for flood density, which was overcome by scaling the data to a smaller range and resampling the lower range of zero risks to create less imbalanced data.  Fully connected neural networks of multi layer perceptrons were used to generate a regression of flood density.  Deeper networks with more hidden layers and trained on resampled data performed the best, leading us to conclude that resampling is a valid strategy for overcoming issues of studying natural weather phenomena with zero-inflated outcome variables.

Problem Statement: Apply artificial neural networks to predict flood density from publicly available datasets in New York state.

### Background and Significance
	Climate change is shifting patterns in the frequency and intensity of natural disasters.  In the United States, extreme precipitation in the Northeast may increase by 52% by 2099 (Picard, 2023), resulting in increased risks of flood and flash flood events. In July 2023, severe flooding devastated several states along the east coast.  West Point in New York received over 7 inches of rain over the course of 4 hours, which shut down trains lines and interstates (Betts, 2023). On a personal level, the two authors of this project would have been caught in the storm in West Point, but changed plans last minute to come back to Maryland ahead of schedule and avoided the floods by lucky circumstances.
	To focus the scope of the study, we propose the target state of New York.  According to the Risk Factor tool, over the next 30 years, New Yor has 17% of total state properties at over 26% of flood risk (Bates, 2021).  New York also has large swaths of farmland, with 6.9 million acres, as well as highly populated urban areas, which are greatly affected by flash floods. 
	Flash floods have significant and damaging social and economic impacts, from loss of life to property damage that sets back communities for years afterwards.  Flood predictors can be utilized to build climate-resilient communities.  This includes land use and zoning planning considerations for local officials and natural disaster preparation such as asset prepositioning and response coordination practice.  The property insurance industry also requires accurate risk assessments, and homeowners can be properly prepared.	

### Motivation for Deep Learning
We have previously utilized non-deep learning methods to predict intermittent precipitation in Tacoma, Washington using data collected from weather services. Our previous methodology involved the use of a similar zero-inflated approach to modeling, using an XGBoost classifier to classify instances of precipitation occurring. We then trained a random forest regression model on all instances of precipitation that did occur. However, this methodology only achieved an accuracy of 70% when predicting the following hour’s precipitation in millimeters.
We believe that as extreme weather becomes increasingly common, it is critical to be able to accurately forecast these events for the sake of safety and public infrastructure. By using neural networks, we hope to be able to model the complex non-linear relationships to forecast upcoming events more accurately and produce maps of where flooding may take place. 

## Data Sources and Variables
### Data Sourcing and Loading
	Public data sets available on ArcGIS online through a UMD academic license were utilized to build the variables of this project.  Historic flood data was sourced from NOAA’s Storm Events Database, which lists historic flood and flash flood events since the 1950s and associated characteristics (National Centers for Environmental Information).  The specific target variable is flood density, which was calculated in ArcGIS as the magnitude of flood occurrences per cell using historic flood locations in the Storm Events database.

    Input variables came from geomorphologic data that are known to be associated with flood risks, such as elevation, slope, and precipitation. Information about land cover features, which can impact how quickly water is absorbed vs. run off during precipitation events, was sourced from the Multi-Resolution Land Cover Characteristics Consortium’s National Land Cover Database (Dewitz, 2019). Hydrologic soil group data, which divides soils into classes based on water infiltration potential, came from the USDA gridded soil survey geographic (GSSURGO) dataset (Soil Survey Staff).  All variables had a resolution of 30 meters, except annual precipitation (Fick, 2017), which was resampled at 30 meters from a 5 meter resolution.  After removing null values, the final dataset contained 9 million rows.  A detailed table of input and target variables and their characteristics can be found in Table 1.

* Table 1

  | Variable           | Description  | Values                 | Source                |  
  |--------------------|--------------|------------------------|-----------------------|  
  | x                  | Pixel Coord  | Lat                    | ArcGIS Online         |  
  | y                  | Pixel Coord  | Lon                    | ArcGIS Online         |  
